= Hyprland Module =

Hyprland Wayland compositor with companion tools.

== Structure ==

<pre>
03-hyprland/
  ├─ default.nix        - Entry point (imports all modules)
  ├─ 00-packages.nix    - Companion packages (waybar, rofi, mako, etc.)
  ├─ 01-options.nix     - Module options (enable toggle)
  ├─ 02-hyprland.nix    - Hyprland compositor + session variables
  ├─ 03-xdg.nix         - XDG desktop portal
  └─ 04-config.nix      - Hyprland user config (hyprland.conf via home-manager)
</pre>

== Packages Included ==

* '''waybar''' - Status bar
* '''rofi''' - App launcher (bind: <code>$mainMod + D</code>, rofi-wayland merged into rofi as of NixOS 25.11)
* '''mako''' - Notification daemon
* '''kitty''' - Terminal emulator (Hyprland default)
* '''wl-clipboard''' - Clipboard support (wl-copy / wl-paste)
* '''swww''' - Wallpaper daemon
* '''grim''' + '''slurp''' - Screenshots
* '''jq''' - JSON processor (used for active window screenshot)
* '''bat''' - Syntax-highlighted file viewer (Super+H keybind hint window)
* '''cliphist''' - Clipboard history manager (bind: <code>$mainMod + Alt + V</code>, picks via rofi)
* '''kwallet''' + '''kwallet-pam''' + '''ksshaskpass''' - Shared KWallet keystore (credentials shared with KDE Plasma)
* '''hyprlock''' - Screen lock
* '''hypridle''' - Idle management
* '''networkmanagerapplet''' - Network tray icon

== Usage ==

'''Step 1:''' Import the module in your host config:

<source lang="nix">
imports = [
  ../../modules/03-hyprland
];
</source>

'''Step 2:''' Enable Hyprland:

<source lang="nix">
myDesktop.hyprland.enable = true;
</source>

'''Step 3:''' Rebuild and select Hyprland at login screen (SDDM).

== TODO: Machine-Specific Config ==

Currently, some values in <code>04-config.nix</code> are hardcoded directly into the generated <code>hyprland.conf</code> — things like the monitor name (<code>eDP-1</code>), resolution, refresh rate, scale, and input sensitivity. This is fine for now but should be improved.

The goal is: '''module logic stays in the module, machine-specific values get declared in the host config file.'''

For example, instead of hardcoding:
<source lang="nix">
monitor=eDP-1,3200x1800@60,0x0,1.25
</source>

the module should expose options like <code>myDesktop.hyprland.monitor</code>, <code>myDesktop.hyprland.scale</code>, etc., and the host's <code>configuration.nix</code> sets them:
<source lang="nix">
myDesktop.hyprland.monitor = "eDP-1";
myDesktop.hyprland.resolution = "3200x1800@60";
myDesktop.hyprland.scale = 1.25;
</source>

This makes the module reusable across machines without editing module source.

== TODO: Per-Application Scaling ==

Different apps render at inconsistent sizes — some appear too large, others too small, depending on whether they respect the Wayland scale factor or fall back to XWayland/X11 behaviour.

The fix involves setting the correct environment variables and per-app overrides. Relevant levers:

* <code>GDK_SCALE</code> / <code>GDK_DPI_SCALE</code> — for GTK apps
* <code>QT_SCALE_FACTOR</code> — for Qt/KDE apps
* <code>XCURSOR_SIZE</code> — cursor size consistency across XWayland apps
* <code>xwayland { force_zero_scaling = true; }</code> in <code>hyprland.conf</code> — prevents XWayland from inheriting the Wayland scale and double-scaling

These should be set in <code>02-hyprland.nix</code> via <code>environment.sessionVariables</code> and the <code>hyprland.conf</code> <code>xwayland</code> block in <code>04-config.nix</code>.

== Notes ==

* '''GPU:''' Both GPUs in Dell XPS 15 9530 have limited Wayland support:
** '''NVIDIA GT 750M''' (legacy_470 driver) — no Wayland support
** '''Intel HD 4600''' (Haswell) — below Hyprland's stated minimums (requires Vulkan 1.1, HD 4600 only supports 1.0). May work with recent Mesa but not guaranteed.
* '''Dual Desktop:''' Can coexist with KDE Plasma 6 — choose at SDDM login. If Hyprland fails to start, just select KDE Plasma instead.
* '''Keyring:''' Uses KWallet (shared with KDE Plasma). KWallet is auto-unlocked at SDDM login via PAM (<code>security.pam.services.login.kwallet</code> with <code>kwallet-pam</code> package). <code>pam_kwallet_init</code> runs in <code>start.sh</code> to read the PAM token and pre-unlock the wallet before any app requests it via D-Bus. For this to work silently, the wallet password must match your login password — see the KWallet Setup section in <code>modules/00-common/README.wiki</code> for the one-time setup steps.
* '''Audio:''' Uses existing Pipewire configuration (no duplication)
* '''Graphics:''' Uses existing <code>hardware.graphics.enable</code> (no duplication)

== Keybind Example ==

Add to <code>~/.config/hypr/hyprland.conf</code>:

<source lang="ini">
$mainMod = SUPER

bind = $mainMod, D,           exec, rofi -show drun
bind = $mainMod, Return,      exec, kitty
bind = $mainMod, Q,           killactive
bind = $mainMod SHIFT, M,     exit
bind = CTRL ALT, L,           exec, hyprlock
bind = $mainMod SHIFT, F,     fullscreen, 0
bind = $mainMod SHIFT, Print, exec, grim -g "$(slurp)" ~/Pictures/screenshot.png
</source>

== Documentation ==

Based on:
* https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=61wGzIv12Ds
* https://wiki.hyprland.org/Nix/
* https://wiki.hyprland.org/Getting-Started/Master-Tutorial/
